>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 7:
INVESTIGATORS FOCUS ON A SOUND
CAPTURED ON THE COCKPIT VOICE
RECORDER FROM THE RUSSIAN PLANE
THAT CRASHED IN EGYPT.
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, FROM
MEMPHIS: HOW POLICE ARE TRYING
TO KEEP PEOPLE WITH MENTAL
ILLNESSES OUT OF JAIL.
AND ACTOR GEORGE TAKEI-- HIS
PERSONAL JOURNEY FROM "STAR
TREK" TO BROADWAY.
>> WHERE ARE WE?
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE HEAD OF EGYPT'S
INVESTIGATION INTO LAST WEEK'S
RUSSIAN AIRLINER CRASH IN THE
SINAI PENINSULA SAID TODAY WHILE
THE PLANE WAS ON AUTO-PILOT, THE
COCKPIT RECORDING REGISTERED A
NOISE IN ITS LAST SECOND.
>> (translated):ALL SCENARIOS
ARE ON THE TABLE.
IT MAY BE THE LITHIUM BATTERIES
OR ONE OF THE PASSENGERS.
IT MAY BE AN EXPLOSION IN THE
FUEL TANK.
IT MAY BE FATIGUE TO THE BODY OF
THE PLANE.
IT MAY BE THAT SOMETHING
EXPLODED.
>> Sreenivasan: THE HEAD OF THE
INVESTIGATION TOLD REPORTERS THE
RECORDING IS BEING SENT TO A LAB
FOR FURTHER ANALYSIS, AND IT IS
STILL TOO SOON TO DRAW
CONCLUSIONS.
THE CHARTERED AIRBUS 321 JET
FROM THE RED SEA RESORT OF SHARM
EL-SHEIK CRASHED 23 MINUTES
AFTER TAKE-OFF, KILLING 224
PEOPLE ON BOARD.
EGYPT'S FOREIGN MINISTER
COMPLAINED TODAY THAT U.S. AND
U.K. INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES HAVE
NOT SHARED THEIR INFORMATION
ABOUT A "FLASH," POINTING TO AN
EXPLOSION BRINGING DOWN THE
PLANE.
TODAY, AVIATION OFFICIALS IN
FRANCE WHERE THE AIRBUS IS MADE
SAID THEY ARE RULING OUT ANY
TECHNICAL FAILURE.
RUSSIA HAS SUSPENDED ALL
COMMERCIAL FLIGHTS TO EGYPT OVER
AIRPORT SECURITY CONCERNS BUT IS
SENDING 90 PLANES THERE THIS
WEEKEND TO PICK UP STRANDED
RUSSIAN TOURISTS.
THE LEADERS OF CHINA AND TAIWAN
HAVE MET FOR THE FIRST TIME IN
66 YEARS.
CHINA'S XI JINPING AND TAIWAN'S
MA YING-JEOU ATTENDED A HISTORIC
SUMMIT TODAY AT A HOTEL IN
SINGAPORE.
THE LEADERS SHOOK HANDS FOR MORE
THAN A MINUTE BEFORE HEADING
INTO PRIVATE TALKS FOR AN HOUR.
THE LARGELY SYMBOLIC MEETING
ENDED WITH NO NEW AGREEMENTS
SIGNED.
SINCE THE END OF THE CHINESE
CIVIL WAR IN 1949, COMMUNIST
PARTY-RULED CHINA HAS REGARDED
TAIWAN AS A BREAKAWAY PROVINCE
AND WANTS THE ISLAND POLITICALLY
REUNITED WITH THE MAINLAND, AND
PRESIDENT XI SAID NOTHING TO
BACK AWAY FROM THAT VIEW TODAY.
PRESIDENT MA OF SELF-RULED,
DEMOCRATIC TAIWAN SAID BOTH
COUNTRIES "SHOULD RESPECT EACH
OTHER'S VALUES AND WAY OF LIFE."
PRESIDENT MA ALSO VOICED
CONCERNS ABOUT MISSILES THAT
CHINA STILL HAS POINTED AT
TAIWAN.
THE WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION
SAYS THE WEST AFRICAN NATION OF
SIERRA LEONE IS EBOLA FREE
BECAUSE IT'S BEEN 42 DAYS, THE
EQUIVALENT OF TWO VIRUS
INCUBATION PERIODS, WITH NO NEW
CASES.
THOUSANDS GATHERED TO CELEBRATE
THE END OF AN OUTBREAK THAT
KILLED NEARLY 4,000 IN SIERRA
LEONE IN THE PAST TWO YEARS.
NEIGHBORING LIBERIA WAS DECLARED
EBOLA FREE IN SEPTEMBER; THE
VIRUS CLAIMED NEARLY 5,000 LIVES
THERE.
GUINEA, WHERE THE OUTBREAK
BEGAN, HAS FOUND SEVEN NEW CASES
IN THE PAST FEW WEEKS.
TWO LOUISIANA POLICE OFFICERS
ARE CHARGED WITH SECOND-DEGREE
MURDER FOR SHOOTING TO DEATH A
SIX-YEAR-OLD BOY WHO WAS INSIDE
HIS FATHER'S S.U.V. FOLLOWING A
POLICE CHASE.
OFFICERS NORRIS GREENHOUSE AND
DERRICK STAFFORD WERE TAKEN INTO
CUSTODY LAST NIGHT.
LOUISIANA'S STATE POLICE
SUPERINTENDENT SAYS THE VIDEO
FROM BODY CAMERAS WORN BY THE
OFFICERS IS "EXTREMELY
DISTURBING."
THE OFFICERS ALLEGEDLY FIRED 18
ROUNDS ON THE S.U.V. TUESDAY IN
THE CENTRAL LOUISIANA TOWN OF
MARKSVILLE.
THE BOY, BUCKLED IN THE FRONT
PASSENGER SEAT, WAS STRUCK FIVE
TIMES.
HIS FATHER, WHO WAS UNARMED, WAS
ALSO SHOT AND REMAINS
HOSPITALIZED.
THE OFFICERS ARE CHARGED WITH
SECOND-DEGREE ATTEMPTED MURDER
FOR SHOOTING HIM.
>> Sreenivasan: FEDERAL FUNDING
FOR THE NATION'S ROADS, BRIDGES
AND MASS TRANSIT IS ONE STEP
CLOSER AFTER THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES PASSED A $325
BILLION TRANSPORTATION BILL THIS
WEEK.
THAT SOUNDS LIKE A LOT OF MONEY,
BUT THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
REQUESTED $478 BILLION TO FIX
THE NATION'S INFRASTRUCTURE.
THE BILL, WHICH NOW GOES BACK TO
THE SENATE, APPROVED SIX YEARS
OF PROJECTS BUT FUNDING FOR ONLY
THREE YEARS.
ONE OF THE UNDERLYING ISSUES IS
THAT CONGRESS WON'T RAISE THE
GAS TAX THAT FUNDS
TRANSPORTATION PROJECTS; IT'S
BEEN STUCK AT 18 CENTS A GALLON
SINCE 1993.
JOINING ME NOW FROM WASHINGTON
TO DISCUSS ALL THIS IS BART
JANSEN, THE TRANSPORTATION
REPORTER FOR "U.S.A. TODAY."
SO, BART, IT'S KIND OF CLASSIC
MATH THAT ONLY SEEMS TO WORK IN
CONGRESS WHERE YOU CAN APPROVE
MAYBE A PROJECT FOR SIX YEARS
AND ONLY FUND IT FOR THREE.
>> WELL, IT IS AN ACCOMPLISHMENT
THAT THEY GOT A SIX-YEAR BILL
THAT THEY HOPE TO RECONCILE AND
GET COMPLETED, GET SENT TO THE
PRESIDENT'S DESK BY
THANKSGIVING.
THE LAST TIME WE HAD A SIX-YEAR
BILL WAS 1998.
THE FOUR-YEAR BILL THAT EXPIRED
IN 2009, THERE HAVE BEEN 35
SHORT-TERM EXTENSIONS SINCE
THEN.
SO EVERYBODY'S PLEASED TO GET A
SIX-YEAR SET OF POLICIES SO THAT
STATE AND LOCAL OFFICIALS CAN
PLAN ROAD BUILDING, BRIDGE
BUILDING BETTER, BUT NOW THE
HARD PART COMES-- HOW DO YOU
FIND THE FUNDING TO SUPPORT $325
OR $342 BILLION WORTH OF
CONSTRUCTION GOALS.
>> Sreenivasan: WHERE HAVE
THEY FOUND THE FUNDING SO FAR?
WHAT NIPS AND CUTS HAVE BEEN
MADE TO TRY TO MAKE THIS
POSSIBLE?
>> SO FAR, THERE ARE THREE MAJOR
POTS OF MONEY TO ADD TO THE
AMOUNT THEY RAISE FROM THE GAS
TAX.
THEY WOULD TAKE-- THE SENATE
VERSION WOULD TAKE $17 BILLION
FROM DIVIDENDS THAT THE FEDERAL
RESERVE PAYS TO BANKS FOR
INVESTING IN THE FEDERAL
RESERVE.
THERE'S ALSO $9 BILLION FROM A
SELL-OFF OF A PORTION OF THE
STRATEGIC PETROLEUM RESERVE.
AND THERE'S $9 BILLION IN
BASICALLY TRAVEL FEES PAID TO
CUSTOMS AND TO THE
TRANSPORTATION SECURITY
ADMINISTRATION.
THOSE AMOUNTS ARE COMBINING TO
BASICALLY BOLSTER THE GAS TAX.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ARE THE
THE INFRASTRUCTURE NEEDS RIGHT
NOW?
WHY IS THIS SPENDING EVEN
NECESSARY?
>> WELL, ONE OF THE REASONS
LAWMAKERS ARE JOINED IN AGREEING
THAT SPENDING NEEDS TO GO UP IS
BECAUSE EVERYBODY CAN SEE
POTHOLES IN THE ROAD OR TROUBLES
WITH THEIR SUBWAYS.
ONE OF THE MOST PROMINENT
EXAMPLES WAS IN 2007, THE
INTERSTATE 35 BRIDGE IN
MINNEAPOLIS COLLAPSED, KILLING
13 PEOPLE.
IN WASHINGTON HERE, OUR SUBWAY
SYSTEM HAS ROUTINE FIRES AND A
WOMAN DIED FROM THE SMOKE OF A
FIRE IN JANUARY IN ONE OF THE
SUBWAY TUNNELS.
SO IT'S A PROBLEM THAT LAWMAKERS
ARE AWARE OF IN BOTH PARTIES.
AND SO THE FEDERAL HIGHWAY
ADMINISTRATION HAS SAID AS THEY
DEBATE WHETHER TO SPEND ABOUT
$50 BILLION A YEAR, THE FEDERAL
HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION SAYS IT
WOULD TAKE $65 BILLION TO $83
BILLION A YEAR JUST TO MAINTAIN
CURRENT STANDARDS.
THE FEDERAL TRANSIT
ADMINISTRATION SAYS THAT THERE
IS A $76 BILLION BACKLOG IN
CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS FOR
TRANSIT PROJECTS NATIONWIDE.
AND THE HIGHWAY FOLKS AT THE
STATE LEVEL, THE AMERICAN
ASSOCIATION OF STATE HIGHWAY AND
TRANSPORTATION OFFICIALS,
ESTIMATE THERE IS A $700 BILLION
BACKLOG IN HIGHWAY PROJECTS TO
MEET CAPACITY, CONGESTION, AND
ALSO BRIDGES.
SO THE SIZE OF THE PROBLEM IS
AGREED UPON.
THE PROBLEM IS HOW TO PAY TO FIX
THOSE PROBLEMS.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT, BART
JANSEN FROM "USA TODAY" JOINING
US FROM WASHINGTON, THANKS
SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: A DECADES-LONG
DECLINE IN HOSPITAL BEDS FOR THE
MENTALLY ILL HAS CONTRIBUTED TO
MANY AMERICANS WITH MENTAL
ILLNESSES ENDING UP IN JAILS.
TO ADDRESS THAT, THE CITY OF
MEMPHIS PIONEERED POLICE
TRAINING TECHNIQUES TO HELP
PEOPLE WITH MENTAL ILLNESS AVOID
GETTING ARRESTED.
ONE THING THE MEMPHIS POLICE ARE
TAUGHT IS THAT THE MENTALLY ILL
ARE ACTUALLY MORE LIKELY TO BE
VICTIMS OF VIOLENT CRIMES THAN
PERPETRATORS.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
THE NEWSHOUR'S MEGAN THOMPSON
LOOKS AT A POLICING APPROACH
THAT'S BECOME A NATIONAL MODEL.
>> Reporter: POLICE OFFICER
CHRISTOPHER ROSS PATROLS A
PRECINCT ON THE SOUTH SIDE OF
MEMPHIS, AN AREA WITH A VERY
HIGH RATE OF CRIME.
ROSS SEES A LOT OF VIOLENCE,
DRUG USE AND PROSTITUTION, BUT
THOSE AREN'T THE ONLY TYPES OF
CALLS THAT ROSS RESPONDS TO.
>> THE MOM'S INVOLVED WITH HER
SON, AND HE'S DIAGNOSED WITH
A.D.H.D. AND MOOD DISORDER, AND
SHE SAID HE'S BEEN TAKING HIS
MEDS.
BUT HE'S BEING UNRULY, SO WE ARE
GOING TO GO SEE WHAT WE CAN DO
TO HELP.
>> Reporter: ROSS IS PART OF THE
MEMPHIS POLICE DEPARTMENT'S
"CRISIS INTERVENTION TEAM," OR
C.I.T...
>> WHAT'S GOING ON?
>> Reporter: ...OFFICERS
SPECIALLY TRAINED TO HANDLE
PEOPLE WITH MENTAL ILLNESS.
HERE, ROSS FINDS A TEENAGE BOY
IN CRISIS.
HIS MOM SAYS HE'S BEING BULLIED
AT SCHOOL.
>> SO, EVERYBODY AT THE SCHOOL
KNOWS THAT YOU ARE SMART, THAT
YOU'VE GOT SOMETHING GOING FOR
YOURSELF.
AND WHAT THEY ARE TRYING TO DO
IS TO STOP YOU FROM BEING ALL
THAT YOU CAN BE.
>> Reporter: ROSS IS TRAINED TO
DEESCALATE SITUATIONS USING
MOSTLY VERBAL TECHNIQUES, TO
KEEP BOTH OFFICERS AND CITIZENS
SAFE AND KEEP PEOPLE WITH MENTAL
HEALTH ISSUES OUT OF JAIL.
>> AS A MATTER OF FACT, I'M
GOING TO GIVE YOU MY NUMBER SO
WHEN YOU'RE HAVE A PROBLEM, CALL
ME, OKAY?
IF YOU'RE FEELING SAD, IF YOU'RE
FEELING DEPRESSED, CALL ME, AND
YOU CAN TELL ME WHATEVER YOU
WANT TO TELL ME.
I DON'T CARE WHAT IT IS.
HANDSHAKE ON THAT.
>> Reporter: AFTER 20 MINUTES,
THE TEEN IS CALM AND AGREES TO
GO BACK INSIDE.
MEMPHIS STARTED ITS C.I.T.
PROGRAM 27 YEARS AGO AFTER THE
POLICE SHOT AND KILLED A MAN
WITH MENTAL ILLNESS WHO CHARGED
AT THEM WITH A KNIFE.
THE CITY FORMED A TASK FORCE
INCLUDING THE MEMPHIS POLICE
DEPARTMENT AND THE
NATIONAL ALLIANCE ON MENTAL
ILLNESS.
AT THE TIME, UNIVERSITY OF
MEMPHIS PSYCHIATRY PROFESSOR
RANDY DUPONT WAS DIRECTING THE
CITY'S MAIN PSYCHIATRIC
EMERGENCY SERVICE.
HE HELPED DEVELOP THE C.I.T.
PROGRAM.
>> IN AN EVENT THAT'S GOING TO
ESCALATE AND BECOME A CRISIS,
IT'S GOING TO BE THOSE FIRST FEW
MINUTES THAT ARE PRETTY
CRITICAL.
SO, WHAT THEY THOUGHT ABOUT WHEN
THEY CAME UP WITH THIS CONCEPT,
WAS, WHY DON'T WE TAKE SOME OF
THAT EXPERTISE... LET'S IDENTIFY
THOSE OFFICERS THAT WANT TO DO
THIS THAT COULD BE GOOD AT IT,
GIVE THEM THE BEST TRAINING WE
CAN FIND, AND THEN LET'S LOOK
AND SEE WHAT KIND OF DIFFERENCES
THAT MAKES.
>> HEY, HOW ARE YOU DOING?
>> Reporter: THAT TRAINING
STARTS WITH CHANGING OFFICERS'
ATTITUDES AND PERCEPTIONS.
DUPONT SAYS PEOPLE IN CRISIS
OFTEN ACT OUT OF FEAR AND MAY
NOT UNDERSTAND WHAT'S HAPPENING
AROUND THEM.
AN UNTRAINED OFFICER COULD
INTERPRET SUCH BEHAVIOR AS
DEFIANCE OR "NON-COMPLIANCE."
>> OFFICERS ARE OFTEN TRAINED IN
THE ACADEMY TO SEE NON-
COMPLIANCE AND RESPOND WITH
GREATER USE OF FORCE.
THAT'S PART OF THEIR TRAINING.
BUT IN C.I.T., WHAT WE'RE TRYING
TO SAY TO THE OFFICERS IS,
"LET'S ANALYZE THE NON-
COMPLIANCE.
LET'S LOOK STRATEGICALLY AT IT."
SO, WE'RE LOOKING FOR THAT
DIFFERENT INTERPRETATION OF
BEHAVIOR.
>> FIRST OF ALL, WE HAVE A TALK
ABOUT HAVING COMPASSION.
>> Reporter: MAJOR VINCENT
BEASLEY IS IN CHARGE OF THE
MEMPHIS C.I.T. PROGRAM.
HE PATROLLED THE STREETS AS A
C.I.T. OFFICER FOR EIGHT YEARS.
ARE ALL OFFICERS CUT OUT TO DO
THIS KIND OF WORK?
>> I DON'T THINK SO.
I REALLY THINK IT TAKES A
SPECIAL PERSON TO DO THAT.
NOT EVERYBODY'S CUT OUT FOR THAT
BECAUSE YOU HAVE TO HAVE
PATIENCE, AND YOU... AND YOU
HAVE TO REALLY CARE ABOUT
PEOPLE.
AND YOU HAVE TO UNDERSTAND THAT
IT'S NOT THE INDIVIDUAL HIMSELF.
IT'S SOMETHING THAT'S GOING ON.
IT'S SOMETHING, YOU KNOW, IN HIS
BRAIN THAT'S NOT WORKING
PROPERLY.
IT'S A CHEMICAL IMBALANCE.
>> Reporter: C.I.T. IS HAVING A
MEASURABLE IMPACT.
MAJOR BEASLEY SAYS OF THE 14,000
911 CALLS LAST YEAR THAT C.I.T.
OFFICERS RESPONDED TO, ONLY 19
ENCOUNTERS RESULTED IN INJURIES
TO A PERSON WITH MENTAL ILLNESS.
AND THE VAST MAJORITY ENDED
WITHOUT A PERSON BEING DETAINED.
AROUND 4,400 WERE TAKEN TO
MENTAL TREATMENT FACILITIES, AND
JUST OVER 600 WERE TAKEN TO
JAIL.
>> SO, WE'RE NOT TAKING NEARLY
AS MANY PEOPLE TO PENAL
FACILITIES THAT ARE... THAT ARE
SUFFERING FROM MENTAL ILLNESSES
BECAUSE WE REALIZE THEY DON'T
NEED TO BE THERE IN MOST CASES.
>> Reporter: THOSE WITH MENTAL
ILLNESS WHO DO GET ARRESTED WIND
UP HERE AT THE SHELBY COUNTY
JAIL, WHERE THERE IS SPECIAL
WING WITH 46 CELLS FOR PEOPLE
WITH MENTAL ILLNESS.
HUNDREDS MORE INMATES ON
PSYCHIATRIC MEDICATION ARE
HOUSED IN THE JAIL'S GENERAL
POPULATION, WHERE MANY ARE ALSO
OFFERED PSYCHIATRIC TREATMENT
AND GROUP THERAPY FOR THINGS
LIKE ADDICTION AND ANGER
MANAGEMENT.
>> WHAT ELSE WOULD YOU ALL DO
WHEN HE THROWS UP THIS "HOW ARE
YOU GOING TO HELP ME?"
>> Reporter: JOINING THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT'S CRISIS INTERVENTION
TEAM IS VOLUNTARY, AND OFFICERS
AND DISPATCHERS MUST ATTEND 40
HOURS OF TRAINING.
THERE ARE THREE DAYS OF
INTENSIVE ROLE-PLAYING BASED ON
REAL SITUATIONS OFFICERS HAVE
FACED IN THE FIELD.
>> I SEE THAT YOU'RE VERY UPSET,
AND I WANT TO HELP YOU.
>> NOBODY CARES ABOUT ME.
AND WITH ME OUT OF A JOB, MAN,
THERE'S NOTHING FOR ME TO BE
HERE FOR.
>> I WANT TO SAY FROM THE
STANDPOINT, LIKE YOU SAID,
DEALING WITH BEING HANDLED BY
C.I.T.
>> Reporter: THE TRAINEES--
DRESSED HERE IN PLAIN CLOTHES--
ALSO SPEND A DAY MEETING PEOPLE
WITH MENTAL ILLNESS.
>> I'M AT A POINT NOW WHERE I
CAN GO BACK TO INDEPENDENT
LIVING.
I STILL MUST TAKE MY MEDICATION.
>> Reporter: THEY LEARN ABOUT
WHAT IT'S LIKE TO LIVE WITH
THEIR CONDITIONS AND ABOUT THEIR
EXPERIENCES WITH THE POLICE.
>> THEY CAME TO MY HOUSE, THE
SHERIFF'S DEPARTMENT CAME TO MY
HOUSE AND KICKED MY DOOR IN.
>> HE TOLD ME TO SHUT MY
FREAKING MOUTH.
>> COULD YOU HAVE A PARAMEDIC
MAKE THE SCENE OVER HERE?
>> Reporter: TODAY THERE ARE 274
ACTIVE C.I.T. OFFICERS LIKE
CHRIS ROSS ON THE MEMPHIS FORCE
OF ALMOST 2,100, OR ABOUT ONE OF
EVERY EIGHT OFFICERS.
THE C.I.T. PROGRAM IS OPERATED
WITHIN THE DEPARTMENT'S EXISTING
BUDGETS.
OFFICERS WEAR THESE PINS TO
IDENTIFY THEMSELVES.
ROSS, WHO'S BEEN C.I.T. FOR
THREE YEARS, NEVER ANSWERS A
CALL WITHOUT BACK-UP.
WHEN HE IS FLAGGED DOWN BY A MAN
WHO SAYS HE'S A VIETNAM VETERAN
AND HAS BIPOLAR DISORDER, ROSS
PULLS OVER TO TALK.
HE USES SIMPLE STRATEGIES,
INTRODUCING HIMSELF AND BEING
CALM.
>> I'M OFFICER ROSS, BUT CALL ME
CHRIS, OKAY?
>> Reporter: ROSS SAYS A HUGE
PART OF HIS JOB IS SIMPLY
LISTENING AND KEEPING TABS ON
PEOPLE HE KNOWS MIGHT NEED HELP.
>> AND TALK TO ME.
THAT'S WHAT I'M HERE FOR.
>> I'M GOING TO EXPLODE.
>> DON'T EXPLODE.
NOBODY GOT TO EXPLODE.
>> BECAUSE I'M TALKING TO YOU.
>> BECAUSE YOU'RE TALKING TO ME.
>> Reporter: HERE HE CHECKS UP
ON A MAN HE'S GOTTEN TO KNOW.
>> THIRD EYE, YOU IN THERE?
>> Reporter: THE MAN LIVES IN AN
ABANDONED MOTEL.
>> ARE YOU ASLEEP?
COME OUT HERE AND TALK TO ME.
I JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE YOU'RE
DOING ALL RIGHT.
>> I GOT ALL-SEEING EYES.
I'M A POWER RANGER AND A SUPER
HERO.
YOU'RE REALLY ON MY SIDE.
>> I'M ON YOUR SIDE.
YOU ALWAYS TRY TO GET THEM
COMFORTABLE AND LET THEM KNOW
I'M HERE TO HELP.
AND WHATEVER THEY SAY, YOU
LISTEN TO IT.
YOU REPEAT IT TO THEM SO THEY'LL
KNOW THAT YOU'RE LISTENING TO
THEM.
AND EVENTUALLY, YOU'LL ESTABLISH
THAT RELATIONSHIP, AND THEY'LL
FEEL MORE OR LESS LIKE YOU'RE
THERE TO HELP THEM, VERSUS
TRYING TO LOCK THEM UP.
>> Reporter: IF MEMPHIS POLICE
DETERMINE PEOPLE MIGHT POSE A
DANGER TO THEMSELVES OR OTHERS,
AN OFFICER CAN TAKE THEM TO THE
CRISIS ASSESSMENT CENTER FOR
EVALUATION AND MEDICATION.
MANY OF THE SERVICES HERE ARE
FREE.
IT'S INSIDE THE MEMPHIS MENTAL
HEALTH INSTITUTE, SO IF THEY
NEED LONG-TERM, IN-PATIENT CARE,
PATIENTS DON'T HAVE TO GO FAR.
AFTER THEY LEAVE, THERE'S ALSO A
NEW OUTPATIENT PROGRAM FOR
CONTINUING PSYCHIATRIC CARE.
OFFICIALS SAY IT'S REDUCED THE
NUMBER OF REPEAT VISITS TO BOTH
THE CRISIS CENTER AND THE
INSTITUTE.
MARK HAVENER HAS BEEN A PATIENT
AT THE MEMPHIS MENTAL HEALTH
INSTITUTE.
HE HAS BIPOLAR DISORDER AND
BEGAN HAVING PSYCHOTIC EPISODES
17 YEARS AGO, LOCKING HIMSELF IN
A CLOSET FOR HOURS AT A TIME AND
ATTEMPTING TO KILL HIMSELF.
DO YOU HAVE ANY IDEA HOW MANY
TIMES YOU'VE TRIED TO END YOUR
LIFE?
>> LOST COUNT AT ABOUT 25.
>> Reporter: 25?
>> AND I LOST COUNT OF MY
HOSPITALIZATIONS AT ABOUT... I
GOT TIRED OF COUNTING AT 25.
>> Reporter: DURING ONE
PSYCHOTIC EPISODE IN 2002,
HAVENER STARTED TO STRANGLE HIS
WIFE.
>> I GRABBED HER BY THE THROAT,
AND I GOT UP AND I SHOVED HER UP
AGAINST THE INSIDE OF THE FRONT
DOOR OF THE HOUSE.
>> Reporter: AFTER HE LET HER
GO, SHE CALLED 911, AND C.I.T.
OFFICERS RESPONDED.
>> BY THIS TIME, I'M PRETTY MUCH
NON-VERBAL.
I CAN'T EXPRESS WHAT'S GOING ON
BECAUSE IT'S A HURRICANE INSIDE
OF ME.
MAELSTROM.
THEY DON'T EVEN HANDCUFF ME
BECAUSE THEY... THEY SEE WHAT
KIND OF CONDITION I'M IN,
TREATING ME AS A HUMAN BEING IN
CRISIS AND NOT A POTENTIAL
PERPETRATOR.
>> Reporter: HAVENER WAS
HOSPITALIZED AND NEVER FACED
CRIMINAL CHARGES.
HE GOT TREATMENT AND TODAY HE IS
STABLE, HAS RECONCILED WITH HIS
WIFE AND WORKS AS A COUNSELOR TO
OTHERS WITH MENTAL ILLNESS.
HE'S ALSO BECOME AN ADVOCATE,
SHARING HIS STORY WITH THE
C.I.T. TRAINEES.
>> AND THAT OFFICER CROUCHED
DOWN TO MY EYE LEVEL, AND HE
LOOKED ME IN THE EYE, AND HE
RECOGNIZED ME AS A PERSON.
>> Reporter: THE STRATEGIES
DEVELOPED IN MEMPHIS ARE NOW
CALLED THE "MEMPHIS MODEL" AND
HAVE NOW BEEN ADOPTED BY ALMOST
3,000 OF THE NATION'S 18,000 LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES.
STUDIES HAVE SHOWN THAT C.I.T.-
TRAINED OFFICERS ARE LESS LIKELY
TO ARREST PEOPLE WITH MENTAL
ILLNESS THAN NON-TRAINED
OFFICERS.
FOR CHRIS ROSS, THAT'S ONE OF
THE THINGS HE LIKES MOST ABOUT
THIS JOB-- THE POTENTIAL TO HELP
PEOPLE RATHER THAN PUT THEM IN
JAIL.
>> THAT'S WHY I WORK, THAT'S WHY
DO IT-- TO MAKE A DIFFERENCE--
BECAUSE IF WE GET TO THE
POINT WHERE WE'RE MAKING A
DIFFERENCE, WE WON'T HAVE TO
LOCK SO MANY PEOPLE UP.
>> Sreenivasan: ACTOR GEORGE
TAKEI IS PROBABLY BEST KNOWN FOR
HIS ROLE AS SULU ON THE ORIGINAL
"STAR TREK" TV SERIES AND
MOVIES.
TOMORROW NIGHT, AT AGE 78, TAKEI
MAKES HIS DEBUT ON BROADWAY IN A
MUSICAL HE HELPED INSPIRE.
IT'S CALLED "ALLEGIANCE," AND
IT'S ABOUT THE INTERNMENT OF
JAPANESE-AMERICANS DURING WORLD
WAR II.
FOR TAKEI, THIS HISTORIC STORY
IS PERSONAL.
THE NEWSHOUR'S MORI ROTHMAN HAS
THIS PREVIEW.
GOTTA GET IT, GOTTA GET IT
GOTTA GET IT, GOTTA GET IT.
>> Reporter: GEORGE TAKEI
BELIEVES A MUSICAL IS THE
PERFECT FORMAT TO RETELL THE
HISTORY OF THE JAPANESE-AMERICAN
INTERNMENT DURING WORLD WAR II.
>> MUSIC HAS THE POWER TO HIT
PEOPLE RIGHT HERE IN THE HEART,
EMOTIONALLY AS WELL AS
INTELLECTUALLY.
>> Reporter: IN EARLY 1942, THE
U.S. ORDERED 110,000 JAPANESE-
AMERICANS LIVING ON THE WEST
COAST TO INTERNMENT CAMPS.
FIVE-YEAR-OLD TAKEI AND HIS
FAMILY WERE SENT TO CAMPS IN
ARKANSAS AND UTAH FOR NEARLY
FOUR YEARS.
THE MUSICAL "ALLEGIANCE" IS
LOOSELY BASED ON THEIR
EXPERIENCE.
TAKEI'S FAMILY HAD LIVED IN LOS
ANGELES.
HIS FATHER, WHO EMIGRATED AS A
CHILD, RAN A DRY CLEANER.
HIS MOTHER RAISED THE THREE
KIDS.
TAKEI'S FAMILY COULDN'T
UNDERSTAND WHY THEIR COUNTRY
MADE THEM LIVE BEHIND BARBED
WIRE FENCES.
>> I COULDN'T RECONCILE WHAT I
READ IN CIVICS BOOKS AND HISTORY
BOOKS ABOUT THE SHINING IDEALS
OF OUR DEMOCRACY WITH WHAT I
KNEW TO BE MY CHILDHOOD
IMPRISONMENT, AND TO BE
SUSPECTED OF BEING THE ENEMY
WHEN WE WERE AMERICANS.
>> Reporter: IN "ALLEGIANCE,"
TAKEI PLAYS THE GRANDFATHER OF
THE MAIN CHARACTER, SAMMY, WHO
STRUGGLES TO RECONCILE HIS PRIDE
IN BEING AMERICAN WITH HIS
FAMILY'S SUFFERING IN THE CAMP,
WHERE THEY LIVED IN COLD
BARRACKS WITHOUT PLUMBING OR
PRIVACY.
>> THEY'RE TREATING US LIKE
ANIMALS!
>> ISAMU, GAMAN.
>> GAMAN?
>> IT MEANS TO CARRY ON.
>> HOLD HEAD HIGH.
>> Reporter: THE MUSICAL FOCUSES
ON SAMMY AND HIS SISTER, KEI,
SIBLINGS DRIVEN APART AFTER
INTERNMENT BY CONFLICTING IDEAS
ABOUT LOYALTY AND PATRIOTISM.
>> WE WANTED TO HUMANIZE THE
INTERNMENT EXPERIENCE.
WE WANTED TO MAKE THEM PEOPLE
WHO WERE RESILIENT.
PART OF RESILIENCE IS THE
ABILITY TO FIND JOY EVEN UNDER
THOSE HARSH CIRCUMSTANCES, AND
LOVE.
>> I'M SO SORRY.
>> Reporter: FOR TAKEI, RELIVING
THE PAINFUL EVENTS OF 70 YEARS
AGO IS A CHANCE TO MAKE AMENDS
WITH HIS OWN FAMILY.
>> IN ONE HEATED DISCUSSION WITH
MY FATHER, I SAID, "DADDY, YOU
LED US LIKE SHEEPS TO SLAUGHTER
INTO THE INTERNMENT CAMPS."
AND THEN HE LOOKED AT ME AND
SAID, "WELL, MAYBE YOU'RE
RIGHT," AND HE GOT UP, WENT INTO
HIS BEDROOM AND CLOSED THE DOOR.
AND I FELT TERRIBLE, AND I NEVER
APOLOGIZED.
I'M APOLOGIZING TO MY DAD EVERY
NIGHT.
>> Reporter: THE CAST OF
"ALLEGIANCE" IS THE FIRST TO BE
LED BY ASIAN ACTORS ON BROADWAY
SINCE THE REVIVAL OF THE MUSICAL
"FLOWER DRUM SONG" 13 YEARS AGO,
BUT TAKEI IS USED TO BREAKING
BARRIERS.
>> READY TO LEAVE ORBIT,
CAPTAIN.
>> Reporter: WHEN "STAR TREK"
BEGAN IN 1966, HE WAS ONE OF THE
FIRST ASIANS TO STAR ON AMERICAN
TV.
FOR YEARS, TAKEI SPOKE PUBLICLY
ABOUT HIS INTERNMENT, BUT THE
IDEA FOR "ALLEGIANCE" DID NOT
OCCUR UNTIL HE DISCUSSED IT WITH
COMPOSER JAY KUO IN 2008.
YOU YOURSELF HAVE BEEN VERY
OUTSPOKEN, GOING AROUND THE
COUNTRY TO SPEAK ABOUT THE
INTERNMENT.
WHY IS THAT?
>> PEOPLE I CONSIDER WELL
INFORMED PEOPLE ARE SHOCKED WHEN
I TELL THEM ABOUT MY CHILDHOOD.
IT'S A VITAL PART OF AMERICAN
HISTORY, AND AMERICANS DON'T
KNOW IT.
AND WE HAVE TO KNOW OUR HISTORY
TO LEARN FROM IT.
>> Reporter: AND TAKEI SAYS THE
INTERNMENT NEEDS TO BE
REMEMBERED SO IT IS NEVER
REPEATED.
>> Sreenivasan: HEAR MORE FROM
GEORGE TAKEI, INCLUDING HIS
VIEWS ON HOW THE JAPANESE-
AMERICAN INTERNMENT DURING WORLD
WAR II REMAINS RELEVANT TODAY.
VISIT US ON FACEBOOK AT
facebook.com/newshour.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: CANCER
RESEARCHERS ARE OPTIMISTIC ABOUT
AN EXPERIMENTAL LEUKEMIA
TREATMENT THAT INVOLVES TAKING
IMMUNE CELLS AND CHANGING THEIR
GENES TO MAKE THEM CANCER
KILLERS.
I.T.N.'S MARTHA FAIRLIE HAS THE
STORY OF THE ONE-YEAR-OLD
PATIENT IN LONDON THE NEW
TREATMENT SEEMS TO HAVE HELPED.
>> Reporter: ONE-YEAR-OLD
LAYLA IS HERE TODAY BECAUSE OF
AN EXPERIMENTAL TREATMENT AND
HER PARENTS' SHEER
DETERMINATION.
SPECIALISTS AT GREAT ORMOND
STREET HOSPITAL HAD TRIED
EVERYTHING FOR HER AGGRESSIVE
FORM OF LEUKEMIA, BUT IT KEPT
COMING BACK.
HER FAMILY REFUSED TO GIVE UP
AND PERSUADED THE DOCTORS TO
GIVE HER THE WORLD'S FIRST DOSE
OF A NEW CELL THERAPY.
>> WE DIDN'T SEE IT AS A TOUGH
DECISION.
WE SAW IT AS THE ONLY DECISION.
THERE WAS NO OTHER OPTION.
WE DIDN'T AGREE TO DO NOTHING.
>> Reporter: SPECIAL CELLS
CALLED T-CELLS SEEK OUT AND
FIGHT INFECTION IN CANCER BUT
THEY CAN'T ALWAYS RECOGNIZE
LEUKEMIA CELLS BECAUSE THEY
HIDE FROM THEM.
THIS DESIGNER IMMUNE CELL
THERAPY TRIALED ON LAYLA
IMPLANTED T-CELLS FROM A DONOR
INTO HER BODY.
THE CELLS HAD BEEN MODIFIED SO
GENES THAT COULD HAVE LEAD
HER BODY TO REJECT THEM WERE
REMOVED AND REPLACED WITH
ANOTHER GENE THAT ENABLED THE
T-CELLS TO SPOT THE LEUKEMIA.
AFTER ONE TINY DOSE OF THE
TREATMENT, LAYLA'S LEUKEMIA WAS
SUCCESSFULLY DESTROYED.
THE PIONEERING TREATMENT GIVEN
TO LAYLA WAS SO NEW IT HAD ONLY
EVER BEEN TESTED IN THE LAB.
THE RESULTS WITH HER HAVE BEEN
REMARKABLE, BUT NOW DOCTORS HAVE
TO PUT IT THROUGH FULL CLINICAL
TRIALS TO MAKE SURE IT'S
SUITABLE FOR OTHER PATIENTS.
IT'S NOT OFTEN TREATMENTS LIKE
THIS WORK FIRST TIME, SO THIS IS
SEEN AS A BIG BREAKTHROUGH.
>> IT DOES MEAN WE HAVE A NEW
WEAPON, AND IT DOES MEAN,
THEREFORE, THAT CHILDREN LIKE
LAYLA WHO REALLY ARE UP
AGAINST IT NOW HAVE SOMETHING
THAT WE CAN DO.
>> Reporter: IN TIME, THIS
COULD CHANGE THE WAY WE TREAT
MANY CANCERS, BUT IT'S ALREADY
CHANGED LAYLA'S LIFE.
>> Sreenivasan: ON THE PROGRAM
TOMORROW, WE REPORT ON
UNACCOMPANIED IMMIGRANT CHILDREN
FROM CENTRAL AMERICA, HOPING TO
STAY LEGALLY IN THE UNITED
STATES.
AND A LOOK AT ELECTIONS IN
MYANMAR AS THAT COUNTRY MOVES
GRADUALLY TOWARDS MORE
DEMOCRACY.
THAT'S IT FOR EDITION OF PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.